What if we see a pattern in our data,
that doesn't occur within
the same calendar year?
Is that still a seasonal pattern?
A cyclical pattern exists,
when data exhibits rises and
falls that are not of a fixed period.
Think of business cycles which
usually last several years, but
where the length of the current
cycle is unknown beforehand.
In finance, times of expansion and
recession in the stock market
reveal cyclical patterns.
A cyclical uptrend is
referred to a bull market,
while a cyclical downtrend is
referred to as a bear market.
These patterns in the general
market occupy multiple years, and
don't have a repeating
pattern within each year.
Many people confuse cyclical
behavior with seasonal behavior, but
they are quite different.
If the fluctuations are not of a fixed
period, then they are cyclical.
If the period is unchanging and
associated with some aspect of the
calendar, then the pattern is seasonal.
In general, with cyclical patterns,
the average length of cycles is longer
than the length of the seasonal pattern.
And the magnitude of cycles tends to
change more than the magnitude of
seasonal patterns.
Also, cyclical patterns are much
harder to predict as well.
The decline in stock
markets is often sudden and
violent, all coming as
a surprise to most.